Hello, everyone.
Welcome back to Exploring Quantum Physics.
In this part we're going to look at how
the concept of spin emerges very
naturally from the Dirac Equation.
It's quite a remarkable thing because so
little goes into the formulation of
Dirac Theory, so much comes out of it.
Including this amazing result of
the prediction of half interval spin
of fundamental particles.
On the exit quiz of the last part of this
lecture, previous part of this lecture,
you found that the angular
momentum operator did
not commute with the Dirac Hamiltonian.
So in particular, here we are with
three dimensional Dirac Equation,
with the various
anticommutations indicated.
And when you just apply this to the,
apply the commutator to the angular
momentum with the Hamiltonian,
It's straight forward to show this.
Because you see the momenta, pi,
are the elements of a vector.
So the angular momentum rotates a spatial
vector around, and so it mixes up,
the weighting of the momenta by
the different quantities alpha.
This seems problematic, but it turns
out to be a feature rather than a bug.
Let's see why.
So, we have to ask, what's gone
wrong with the angular momentum?
Is there something else that
exists in the Dirac Equation that
can be used to sort of fix the problem
with the violation of angular momentum?
So let's see if we can identify
any other constants of motion
that derive from these
various relationships.
And I emphasize here that
everything we're doing now
is independent of the representation that
we take for the alphas and the betas.
So, as you'll see in a moment, if you sit
down and actually try this, you quickly
find something out and that is,
first of all, in the Dirac Equation, we're
only given anticommutation relationships
between involving these alphas and betas.
But it turns out that when you construct
quadratic forms of the alpha and beta
that you can get commutation
relations out of those.
So here I'm sort of anticipating
the result by this particular definition.
But we're just going to use the cross
product of alpha with itself
times h bar over 4i to
define this new object.
Soit's defined entirely in terms
of these anticommuting numbers of
Dirac Equation and let's see what type
of commutation relationships it yields.
Okay, so,
let's just look at things one at a time.
So, here's s1.
It's given by the cross
product of alpha with itself.
It's the one complement
of a cross product,
which through the anticommutation
relationship simplifies to this.
Now we don't know what
the product alpha 2,
alpha 3 is because we don't have
a definite value of alpha 2, alpha.
That's going to depend
upon the representation.
But just bear with me.
It turns out that,
let's try to look at the commutator
of s1 with the Hamiltonian
sort of bit by bit.
So the first thing I'll, that's looked
at is the commutate of s1 with beta.
Okay, so
here's the principle I mentioned earlier.
Here, this is how you write
the commutator down, in the usual way.
But now you can use
the anticommutation relationship
to pass beta to invert
the order of beta and
alpha 3 and
you pick up a minus sign when you do that.
And so do you see you just do that again.
You get rid of the minus sign.
And so, s1 commutes with beta.
And it's automatically, too,
that s2 and s3 do as well.
You can verify those if you like.
But it's a very similar reason.
So that makes it some
kind of candidate for
further investigation because at least it
commutes with part of the Hamiltonian.
Now let's see what it does for
other elements.
Okay, so, sticking with this value for
the, this, well, it'll turn out
to be the spin operator, let's look
at the commutator of s1 with alpha 1.
Okay, so now, once again,
very straightforward,
just the algebraic writing out a1,
alpha 1 minus alpha 1, s1.
And then invoking the anticommutation
relationship to invert
the order with getting a negative sign.
And then doing it again,
we find that s1, alpha 1 vanishes.
So that's possibly a nice thing.
Let's go further.
And now we start to see
something interesting.
So here's again s1,
straightforward development commutator.
Inverting the order,
and so now we have s1,
alpha 2 is proportional
to i h bar alpha three.
So if you think about your
epsilon a b c operations,
then that's suggestive.
So let's go one step further.
And, given the, given those previous
operations you might want to pause.
Scroll back and
then work out the commutator of
the vector s with the Hamiltonian.
So again the vector s is defined this
way and there's the Hamiltonian.
And again, I recommend that you do
that and what you find is this.
So, do you see that the commutator of s,
s doesn't commute with the Hamiltonian but
it returns the opposite of what
the commutator of l does with Hamiltonian.
Therefore the vector sum
of these two operations,
the orbital angular momentum, which is,
remember that l is equal to r cross p,
r cross p.
The angular momentum contains
only the spacial coordinates,
the coordinate and
the momentum of the electron, and
then s is proportional
to alpha cross alpha.
So the ingredients of s are just these
magical anticommuting numbers that
have nothing to do with the spatial,
the space coordinate or
the momentum coordinate of the electron.
So it's as if it it's
something intrinsic and so
this new object which is the sum of two
vectors commutes with the Hamiltonian.
And you can also show that
the components of the spin
operator satisfy the components
of an angular momentum.
But it differs from the orbital momentum,
in that the intrinsic
spin angular momentum has value of
half of reduced blocks constant.
So all that came just from this
amazingly simple equation.
It yielded both spin, a property of
the electron that was postulated, but
couldn't really be associated with
any reasonable physical theory.
And then the existence of antimatter,
something that no one had ever thought of.
And which had a revolutionary
influence on the world.
So, just to wrap things up for now, the
other things, antimatter, electron spin,
the Dirac Equation also gives this so
called anomalous magnetic moment.
It describes that correctly,
gives fine structure of atomic
spectra to very good accuracy.
And, then it has a bunch of other sort of,
paradoxes involved.
So for example, the Zitterbewegung,
discovered by Schrodinger, which
suggests that the free Dirac electron is
always oscillating violently
at the speed of light.
And that the classical
motion's just a drift motion.
Now this is a simplistic interpretation.
But, recently, there have been
counterparts to this relativistic
zitterbewegung encountered in
non-relativistic system, in fact,
in cold trapped atoms and such things
as topological insulators have been
found to have Dirac-like dispersion points
in their electronic band structure.
So there's the richness
of the Dirac Equation
extends well beyond its application
to relativistic particles.